# Creating SIG TF.js

| Status        | Proposed      |
:-------------- |:---------------------------------------------------- |
| **RFC #**     | 
| **Author(s)** | Ping Yu (piyu@google.com), Sandeep Gupta (sandeepngupta@google.com) |
| **Sponsor**   | Thea Lamkin (thealamkin@google.com)                  |
| **Updated**   | 2020-09-16                                           |

## Objective

We propose to create a Tensorflow SIG to facilitate community-contributed components 
to tensorflow/tfjs. This document outlines the context goals, and engagement plan for 
the proposed Special Interest Group.

## Context

JavaScript is a very versatile and widely-used language. With TensorFlow.js, web application 
developers and JS developers can now use Machine Learning with TensorFlow in their JS 
applications. TensorFlow.js is the leading framework for ML in JavaScript with huge user growth 
(2.1M npm downloads, more than 2x YoY growth in the number of avg daily downloads). With the 
growth of the library, we now support an increasing number of use cases across a variety of 
platforms and backends, with many more models, use-cases, and applications. 

The core TensorFlow.js engineering team has been working on building the infrastructure and 
tooling to enable ML to run in JavaScript powered applications, as well as adding support for 
more types of models. TensorFlow.js has more than 220 contributors on GitHub which include many 
passionate contributors (individual developers, GDEs, and enterprise users) who have been active 
participants in the TensorFlow.js ecosystem. We want to accelerate the community involvement in 
the project to help continue meet the needs and help drive new directions for the project. 

## Goals & Objectives

We welcome community contributions on any area of TensorFlow.js, but the SIG will be focused on 
the following goals:
- Driving TensorFlow.js features for Server-side execution with tfjs-node. This will include 
building tooling and infra for end to end, production-ready ML with TensorFlow.js. 
- Developing features for specific platforms and deployments (eg. React Native, IoT and embedded 
devices, etc); 
- Building workflows for Transfer learning features for customizing models
- Adding support for newer models and application areas (eg. NLP, RL, etc), and data analysis 
algorithms
- Conducting research and implementing prototypes for client-side, privacy preserving ML and 
Federated Learning. 
- Identifying performance issues, tradeoffs, and requirements.
- Model benchmarking across browsers, hardware and devices.
- Model encryption.
- Model visualization.
- These projects will move towards community ownership as work streams mature. 


## Membership

We encourage any developers working at the intersection of machine learning and web/JS 
applications to join and participate in the activities of the SIG. Whether you are working on 
advancing the platform, prototyping or building specific applications, or authoring new libraries, 
we welcome your feedback on and contributions to Tensorflow.js and its tooling, and are eager to hear 
about any downstream results, implementations, and extensions. 

We have multiple channels for participation, and publicly archive discussions in our user group and 
announcements mailing lists:
- tfjs@tensorflow.org -- our general mailing list that all are welcome to join ([archive group](https://groups.google.com/a/tensorflow.org/g/tfjs))
- tfjs-announce@tensorflow.org -- Announcement only mailing list for TF.js community ([archive group](https://groups.google.com/a/tensorflow.org/g/tfjs-announce))

We will create a new mailing list for TensorFlow.js SIG members. 

### Other Resources 
- Repository: https://github.com/tensorflow/tfjs
- Documentation: https://www.tensorflow.org/js

## Organization and Governance
SIG project leads will be added to a SIG TF.js maintainers team on GitHub to streamline their 
contributions to tensorflow/tfjs. As specific ideas and work streams develop, we will explore creating 
new, community-owned repos that the SIG will drive.

## Contacts
### Project Lead(s):
- Ping Yu (Google)
- Sandeep Gupta (Google)
- Ton Ngo (IBM): 
  - Server side support (GPU, training)
  - End-to-end pipeline on Kubernetes (Kubeflow)
- Ricky Cao (Alibaba)
  - Building tooling and infra for end to end, production-ready ML with TensorFlow.js.
  - Pipeline with transfer learning
  - Model Encryption
- Ningxin Hu (Intel)
  - Benchmarking and performance optimization
- Gant Laborde (Infinite Red)
  - Platforms (React and React Native)
  - Adding support for newer models and application areas (eg. NLP, RL, etc),
  - Model visualization

### SIG members: 
- Eric Li (Alibaba)
- Zebai (Alibaba)
- Paul Van Eck (IBM)
- Ted Chang (IBM)
- YiHong Wang (IBM)

### Administrative questions: 
- Thea Lamkin (Google): thealamkin at google dot org 
- Joana Carrasqueira (Google): joanafilipa at google dot org
- tf-community at tensorflow dot org

### Meeting cadence: TBD 

